hello guys in the last video I have
shown you how to use classes in Python
now in this video I am going to show you
how you can use constructors and
destructors with classes in Python this
constructor and destructor are also
called initialization and deletion
member functions of the class so first
of all let's see how we can use
constructor in Python in the last video
I have given you a small little example
of class and how to create a class and
we have created a person class and we
have created two member function one
member function to set the values and
other member function to print the name
right so first member function we named
it as set full name and in this function
we have we were passing two arguments
first name and last name and this
printful named member function we were
using to print the name of the person
and then I have shown you how you can
create an instance or object of a class
like this and how to use these member
function like this using the instance of
the glass now I'm going to take the same
example to show you how you can use
constructor with this same class so
first of all to define a constructor you
just use normal function definition with
d EF and then you give double underscore
in it then double underscore and give
the bracket and give colon here and in
here as any other member function you
can perform any task so for example I
want to print something that
our class is created for examples so I'm
just printing a class is created not
like this but class is created right so
first of all what is the use of this
constructor generally in programming
languages constructors are used to
initialize the value okay so whenever
you create the instance of a class so we
are creating the instance of a class
here as soon as you create the instance
of a class this constructor is called
immediately so you don't need to
explicitly call the constructor of a
class you may call it or you may not
call it but don't forget to give the
self argument as I am showing you in the
last video that you need to use this
keyword self with every member function
of a class and this indicates to the
instance of a class so program a person
name will be replaced by self here in
the last video I have shown you so as
soon as I create an instance of a class
this init member function will be
automatically called so you don't need
to explicitly call this member function
so I am going to run this save run and
you can see here it gives us the result
our class is created even though we
haven't called our init member function
explicitly it's printing first this our
class is created that means as soon as
you create this instance of a class
this member function is called right so
always remember
the constructor definition is reserved
here with double underscore in it and
this also ends with double underscore so
this is the reserved keyword in Python 2
called constructor
you cannot give any definition or any
name to the constructor it's reserved
which is this one in a same way we can
use destructor to destroy the instance
of a class
okay so and destructors are also called
whenever our instance is out of scope so
let me show you how you can call this
Tuerto first
so destructor also you can just define
it as a normal function with to
underscore de l and this is two
underscores and then just call self here
keyword and then keep colon here and
then you can just write the
functionality of the code for example I
have or will print I can print our class
instance is destroyed so our class
object is destroyed and this is also
reserved in Python with double
underscore de l and this also ends with
double underscore and this function is
also automatically called whenever your
class or in class instance goes out of
scope out of scope me
means that this class instance is no
longer used
so in here after this code our class
instance scope is completed because this
is no longer used in further code
because there is no code obviously right
then whenever this class or person name
goes out of scope this deletion member
function will be called automatically
and it just basically the use of this
destructor deletion member function is
to a garbage collection kind of use so
it just collect the garbage or all the
resources and destroy all the resources
which are used by this instance which is
person name so I will just save my
program and run it and you can see here
whenever I just created this it's not
printing this deletion member message
here but whenever you can you use the
instance of a class dot underscore
underscore deleting so underscore
deletion member and then whenever you
run this this is printed a class object
is destroyed so whenever you use this
deletion member function it destroys all
the resources which are used by your
class instance okay so this is the use
of this destroyer or destructor now it's
not a you know compulsory that you
cannot pass any argument with this
initialization you can pass argument for
example I can pass for example I can
pass any argument for example I want to
pass I
D of the person I am I'm using or I want
to print the name of so I want to
initialize the ID of a person like this
I can just pass this argument with my
initialization member function and then
I can just use self dot ID is equal to
ID and then I can call this ID in my
destructor also so for example this
structure can also take some arguments
and we can call this self-taught ID for
example I will print this ID here and
then I can just print the message right
so it's not necessary that our
initialization or our constructor has to
has to initialize with no argument it
can take any number of argument as an
initialization but whenever you give
this argument in the initialization here
then whenever you create the instance
you need to pass the that argument here
so we are creating the instance here and
because the initialization takes this
one argument which is ID we are passing
5 as an ID here in the initialization ok
so this is how you can initialize it and
now whenever you run your program once
again you can see here our class is
created once again and as soon as this
class is created we are setting the ID
of a person as we pass in the
constructor which is here and then self
dot ID is set here and whenever we call
the destructor we are once again calling
the ID of the person which is this one
and then printing the message this one
right
so in this way you can use a constructor
and destructor or initializer or and
deletion in Python and I hope you have
enjoyed this video please rate comment
and subscribe and bye for now